# BoilerAlgo

## Abstract
Optimizing class schedules manually is a tedious process that can necessitates checking many different data sources. In this paper, we set out to replace this hassle with an algorithmic solution. Because solution problems to optimization of this format are widely recognized to be NP-hard, and because P vs. NP is an open question in Computer Science, there is known determenistic solution whose runtime is polynomial. Instead, we set out to replace this with a non-determensitic heuristic implemented as a genetic algorithm. We first discuss the components of a generic GA, the fitness function used to evaluate schedules generated, and finally show our solution has a worst-case time complexity of $O(n^2)$.

# Penalty Table 

The fitness function relies on evaluating penalties for the various different schedule posibilities generated by the GA. A solution is optimized when the required penalty is zero and the optional penalty converges to a single value. 

## Required Penalties
Penalties for failing to meet required componets are theoretically infinite as any of such issues means that the schedule is unsatisfiable, but they can be cast down to finite values for debugging and usability purposes (ie avoiding negative values when adding penalty scores together). $n$ denotes an invalid entry of the given type. The overall formula is $\rho = \sum_{i=0}^n p_i$, where $\rho$ is the overall score, $n$ is the number of courses to be scored, and $p_i$ is the penalty incurred by the $i$-th term. 

1. Invalid (null) class in list ($10000$)
2. Time conflicts, that is two classes occur during some common interval of time ($1000$)
3. Name conflicts, that is multiple classes in the schdule are the same ($100$)
4. Unfulfilled requirements, that is a class that is marked as required is not present in the schedule ($10$)

## Optional Penalties
When working with optional fields such as RateMyProfessor or time of day preferences, there is rarely a valid solution that achieves the best case where the best section of each class is used. Instead, we assigned penalties based on the distance between the ideal case for the schedule and the actual case in the schedule that is generated. Next, we assign weights to each of the various components and follow the general form $\omicron=\sum_{i=0}^n p_iw_i$, where $\omicron$ is the total socre, $i$ is an element between 0 and the maximum number of parameters of optimization, $n$, $p_i$ is the value of the $i$-th paremeter, and $w_i$ is the weight of the $i$-th parameter. It follows that a lower overall score is ideal as we wish to minimize the overall score. Let $\alpha$ denote ratings and $\beta$ denote time of day

1. RMP ratings follow the formuala $p_\alpha = \max(\alpha) - \alpha_i$. As $\alpha_i$ approaches the max score, $p_\alpha \to 0$, where $\alpha$ is the quantized distance between $\alpha_i$ and $\max(\alpha)$

    * The quantized difference is the difference of the sorted array of times.  

2. Time of day preferences follow the formula $p_\beta = \max(\beta) - \beta_i$. As $\beta_i$ approaches the max score, $p_\beta \to 0$, where $\beta$ is the binary distance between the value and the optimal location. 

    * Binary distance is 1 if the time is not within the desired time ranges, 0 otherwise. 


## Overall Evaluation
We apply the formula $\sigma = \frac{1}{1+\omicron + \rho}$, where $\sigma$ is the total score for some generation. Therefore, it follows that as $\rho, \omicron$ tend to zero ($\rho, \omicron \to 0$). Becuase $\rho$ must be $0$ for any solution, a solution is optimized as $\Delta \omicron \to 0$ (and ideally $\omicron \to 0$) 